
== Analytic expressions for the HRTF spherical harmonics ==
\label{sec:analytic}

\ignore{As explained in the introduction, Ambisonics decoding is normally optimized for a
listener at one point in the interior of the array 
(for regular equidistant layouts, this point is normally the center of the sphere).
However, when an actual listener experiences the playback, the situation changes substantially: 
even if the head could be maintained exactly at the center, the ears would be displaced about $10 cm$ from it.

Given the fact that in Ambisonics decoding similar signals are sent to many loudspeakers, the different time of 
arrival of the waves to the ears tends to produce a strong colouring, rather close to comb-filtering. This is mostly
noticeable when listening to binaural signals obtained from Ambsionics recordings or synthesis.}

This section applies the concepts introduced in section~\ref{sec:ambisonics}
to obtain analytic expressions for  the HRTF spherical components.
The following approximations will be adopted:
\begin{enumerate}
\item the head is approximated by a perfect sphere,
\item the loudspeakers are approximated by a continuous constant-density array,
\item the frequency-dependent diffraction caused by the head is approximated by a simple time-delay due to 
the travelling of the wave around the surface before reaching each ear.
\end{enumerate}
\ignore{The three approximations together make it possible to obtain exact analytic expressions for the 
HRTF spherical harmonics.}
Section \ref{sec:realistic_conditions} shows that the main features of the filtering
are captured by the results obtained under these approximations,
and are still present in more realistic situations.

The third assumption allows the writing of the HRTF field in a simple closed-form:
\be
H^{L/R}(t,a,e) = { \delta( t- t^{L/R}_{arr}(a,e) ) \over c t_{arr}(a,e) } \,,
\ee
where $\delta(t)$ is the Dirac-delta function, 
$t^{L/R}_{arr}(a,e)$ is the time of arrival of an impulse from the loudspeaker
at $(a,e)$ azimuth and elevation to the L/R ear, 
and $c$ is the speed of sound.
A further assumption is to consider
loudspeaker distances $r$ much larger than
than the radius $R$ of the head, and neglect terms subleading in $R/r$:
\be
H^{L/R}(t,a,e) = { \delta( t- t^{L/R}_{arr}(a,e) ) \over r }  
+ \calo (R / r) \approx { \delta( t- t^{L/R}_{arr}(a,e) ) \over r }\,,
\ee
which amounts to neglecting the pressure decay due to distance travelled between both ears.
Under this approximation, equation \bref{projection} for the HRTF spherical harmonic components becomes
\bea
\label{eq:amplitudeDelayTimeIntegral}
H^{L/R}_{l,m,\sigma}(t)
&=& {1 \over 4\pi r} \int d\Omega \,\, Y_{l,m,\sigma}(e,a) \delta(t-t^{L/R}_{arr}(e,a)) .
\eea
In what follows, the discussion will be focused on the left ear functions;
the right ear can be deduced from the former by symmetry.

Figure: fig:SphericalHead-ShadowedDelay figures/SphericalHead-ShadowedDelay.pdf
Geometry used to deduce Woodworth/Schlosberg formula.
% The near case is considered when the angle from the ear to the source is under $\phi_0$.
% Our simplifications consider that $r\gg R$, so $\phi_0 \rightarrow \frac \pi 2$

The Woodworth/Schlosberg formula @cite:Woodworth_ExperimentalPsycology 
can be used to obtain $t^L_{arr}$ in the spherical head approximation (fig. \ref{fig:SphericalHead-ShadowedDelay}):
\bea
c \, t^L_{arr}(\phi) & = &\sqrt{r^2+R^2 - 2 R r \cos\phi}  \sac \phi \in [0, \phi_0) \nn
c \, t^L_{arr}(\phi) & = & \sqrt{r^2-R^2} +R ( \phi -\phi_0)  \sac \phi \in [\phi_0,\pi) \,,
\eea
where $\phi$ is the
angle between two lines through the origin, one pointing to the left ear, and one pointing to the loudspeaker;
and $\phi_0 = \arccos R/r$. Note that, according to this definition, $\phi$ is a function
$\phi=\phi(a,e)$ of the azimuth/elevation coordinates  on the sphere.
In the present approximation ($r \gg R$), these formulae yield:
\bea
c \, t^L_{arr}(\phi) & = & r - R \cos \phi  + \calo(R/r) \sac \phi \in [0,\pi/2) \,,\nn
c \, t^L_{arr}(\phi) & = & r + R (\phi-\pi/2) + \calo(R/r) \sac \phi \in [\pi/2,\pi) \,.
\eea
It will be convenient to redefine the time coordinate as $\tau = t + r/c$, and define
$t_0 = R/c$. This simplifies the equation to:
\bea
\tau^L_{arr}(\phi) & = & - t_0 \cos \phi  \sac \phi \in [0,\pi/2) \,, \nn
\tau^L_{arr}(\phi) & = &  t_0 (\phi-\pi/2) \sac \phi \in [\pi/2,\pi) \,.
\label{eq:sphericalHeadDelay}
\eea
Equation \bref{eq:sphericalHeadDelay} will be used in the next sections to compute
the spherical harmonic components of the HRTF field for 2D and 3D layouts.


