= Incoherence compensation =

== Problem ==

Due to small missplacements of speakers and microphones during HRTF database recording,
higher frequencies tend to be attenuated more than lower frequencies.
Missplacements cause waves reaching the listener with a different delays.
Delay implies dephase, and the more dephase the less both waves sum up.
Because the same delay causes a dephase which is proportional to the frequency,
the higher the frequency the higher the attenuation.

== Simulation ==

Such errors have several degrees of freedom: the microphone position and each speaker position.
A very simple case is having correct listener location at the center and
correct orientation for each each speaker
but introducing gaussian error to the distance to each the speaker.
The following code simulates the effect of such error:

Code: python
TODO: Place the code 

Figure: fig:IncoherenceSimulation IncoherenceSimulation.png 
Simulated spectral amplitude decrease due to random displacements on the speaker distance.

Doing the simulation we detect that the results are:
* Sensible to the mean variation
* Sensible to the number of speakers
* Hardly repeatable

Also, the function after the first lobe is very sensible to the sample set.
And this unstability have a higher impact on the inverse filter.

== Analysis ==

Equation:
	N(t) = \frac 1 {\sigma\sqr{2\pi}} e^{-\frac{t^2} {2\sigma^2} } \\
	S(w,t) = e^{jwt} \\
	H(w) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} N(t) S(w,t) dt \\
	H(w) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \frac 1 {\sigma\sqr{2\pi}} e^{-\frac{t^2} {2\sigma^2} } e^{jwt} dt \\
	H(w) = e^{- \frac{\sigma^2 w^2} 2} \\
	\frac 1 {H(w)} = e ^ {\frac{\sigma^2 w^2} 2} \\

The inverse filter does not converge so we need to find a minimal phase equivalent.

TODO: Should we?


Maxima code:
Code: python
sine(w, t) := exp(%%i * w * t);
normal(t) := 1/(s*sqrt(2*%%pi))*exp(-t^2/(2*s^2));
inverse = integrate(1/integrate(sine(w,t)*normal(t),t,-inf,inf)*sine(w,t),w);

Equation:
	Inverse(t) = \frac {\sqr{2\pi}} \sigma i e^{\frac{t^2}{2\sigma^2}} \log (erf ( \frac 1 {\sqr{2}} (\sigma w i - \sigma^{-1} t )))





== Obtaining the standard speaker deviation from the HRTF database ==

So, we found analytically the inverse filter that can be used to compensate
frequency dependant attenuation caused by small missplacements on the speakers.
But such filter depends on the standard deviation of the speakers.
We can obtain such data given an HRTF database by measuring for each HRTF
the time until the first significative maxima or minima.

Such delay is not the delay to the sphere center `C` 
as HRTF's are recored at the ear position of the subject 
but we can deduce it if we know the nominal radius
and the distance between the ears.

Figure: fig:earToCentralDelay earToCentralDelay.png
`R'` is the displaced distance from the center to the speaker,
`R_r` is the measured distance to the right ear,
`h` is the distance from the center to the right ear, and
`\beta` is the angle that forms the vector to the speaker with the line crossing both ears and the center.

From the triangles on figure \ref{fig:earToCentralDelay} we can deduce that:

Equation:
R'\sin\beta = R_r\sin\alpha \\
\sin\alpha = \frac { R' \sin\beta } {R_r} \\
\cos\alpha = \sqrt{ 1 - \frac{R'^2 \sin^2\beta} {R_r^2} } = \frac 1 {R_r} \sqrt{R_r^2 - R'^2 \sin^2\beta}

On the other hand we have that:
Equation:
R'\cos\beta + R_r\cos\alpha = h \\
R'\cos\beta + \sqrt{R_r^2 - R'^2 \sin^2\beta} = h \\
\sqrt{R_r^2 - R'^2 \sin^2\beta} = h - R'\cos\beta \\
R_r^2 - R'^2 \sin^2\beta = h^2 - 2hR'\cos\beta + R'^2\cos^2\beta \\
R'^2 - 2hR'\cos\beta + h^2 - R_r^2 = 0 \\
R' = \frac 1 2    2h\cos\beta \pm \frac 1 2 \sqrt{ 4h^2 \cos^2\beta - 4(h^2-R_r^2)  } \\
R' = h\cos\beta \pm \sqrt{ R_r^2 - h^2 \sin^2\beta  }

We need to take the MINUS sign in this equation to satisfy `h = R'+R_r` when `\beta=0`.
So how to compute `\beta` given the elevation `\theta` and the azimut `\phi`?
Equation:
\cos\beta = y = \cos\theta \sin\phi

While for the sinus:
Equation:
\sin^2\beta = x^2 + z^2 = \cos^2\theta\cos^2\phi + \sin^2\theta

So we finally obtain that:
Equation:
R' = h y \pm \sqrt{ R_r^2 - h^2 (x^2+y^2)  }

:DGG: Toni, fixa-t'hi que no necessitem pas les dos orelles.

Applied to the KEMAR database it gives aproximatelly a standard deviation of 3.2 cm.

TODO: Still some adjustements must be taken as several IR give a delay between 1 and 10 distorting the result.



== Velocity to presure effect ==

TODO: I have not fully understood which is the factor that applies to H_v

We are distributing the sound pressure by a factor of `(1-\cos\theta)`.
To know how this affects the pressure relative to using a constant factor,
we should compare the volume of such cardioid to the volume of an sphere.

Equation:
	\int_0^\pi (1 - \cos\theta) 2\pi \sin\theta d\theta = \pi \int_0^\pi (2\sin\theta - \sin 2\theta) = \pi \[\cos\theta - \frac 1 2 \cos 2\theta \]_0^{\pi} = 2\pi

Equation:
	\frac {2/pi} {3/4\pi} = \frac 8 3

== Simulating errors of the microphone placement ==

Implications of errors introduced on the microphone placement
migth be different to errors on the distance to a speaker.
Errors on the microphone placement delay similarly the signal comming from close speakers,
so signals will be more coherent.

Being `\vec r` the vector from the ideal center to a speaker `i`,
and `\vec a` a random displacement.

Equation:
	|\vec r'_i|^2 = |\vec r_i + \vec a| = (r_{ix} + a_x)^2 + (r_{iy} + a_y)^2 + (r_{iz} + a_z)^2 = \\
		(r_{ix}^2 + r_{iy}^2 + r_{iz}^2) + 2 (r_{ix} a_x + r_{iy} a_y + r_{iz} a_z) + (a_x^2 + a_y^2 + a_z^2) = \\
		|\vec r_i|^2 + 2 \vec r_i \cdot \vec a + |\vec a|^2 = 
		|\vec r_i|^2 + 2 |\vec r_i| |\vec a| \cos \gamma_i + |\vec a|^2 = \\
		R^2 ( 1 + 2 x \cos \gamma_i + x^2 )

Where `x = \frac {|\vec a|}{|\vec r_i|}` is a random displacement (normal distribution) 
which is constant for a given setup
and relative to the module of the nominal speaker distance,
and `\gamma_i` is a random angle (uniform distribution),
which is constant for a given setup,
between the displacement vector and the nominal position vector of each speaker,

The relative increase of distance in function of the movement can be expressed like that:

Equation:
	{|\vec r`_i|} = R \sqr {1 + 2 x \cos \gamma_i + x^2}

Where `R` is the nominal distance to any speaker.
Expressed as time:
Equation:
	t = \frac R c \sqr {1 + 2 x \cos \gamma_i + x^2} = T \sqr {1 + 2 x \cos \gamma_i + x^2}


Notice that, if we consider an infinitesimal density of speakers,
sending a pulse to all the speakers will cause the same impulse response
whatever the error vector direction.
So the only significative random variable is `x` which is the module of such displacement
normalized by the nominal distance to every speaker and obeys a normal distribution.

Given a concrete microphone displacement,
all the speakers at a given `\gamma_i` to the displacement vector have the same delay.
So that the impulse is proportional to
Equation:
	\frac {2\pi \sin\gamma } { 4 \pi } = \frac 1 2 \sin\gamma

So for a given frequency `w`, and a random displacement `x`, we can compute the transfer function of a sinusoid like that:
Equation:
	D(w,x) = \\
	\int_0^{\pi} \sin\gamma e^ {jwt } d\gamma = \\
	\int_0^{\pi} \sin\gamma e^ {jwT (\sqr {1 + 2 x \cos \gamma + x^2}-1) } d\gamma = \\
	\frac 1 {2x} \int_{1+2x+x^2}^{1-2x+x^2} e ^{jwT\sqrt u - jwT} du = \\
	\frac 1 {2x} \int_{(1+x)^2}^{(1-x)^2} e ^{jwT\sqrt u -jwT} du = \\
	\frac 1 {2x} \[ 2 \frac { (1 - j w T \sqrt u) e^{j wT \sqrt u -jwT}  } { w^2 T^2 }  \]_{(1+x)^2}^{(1-x)^2} = \\
	\frac 1 {xw^2T^2} \[  (1 - j w T \sqrt u) e^{jwT \sqrt u -jwT} \]_{(1+x)^2}^{(1-x)^2} = \\
	\frac 1 {xw^2T^2} \[ (1 - j w T (1-x)) e^{-jwTx} - (1 - j w T (1+x)) e^{jwTx}  \] = \\

Expressing it as a function of `t=Tx`:
Equation:
	D(w,t) = \frac 1 {tTw^2} \[ (1 - jw(T-t)) e^{-jwt} - (1 - jw(T+t)) e^{jwt}  \] = \\

Now that we know which is the impulse response for a given `x`,
let's compute it given a normal distribution of `x`:

Remember that the normal distribution was:
Equation:
	N(t) = \frac 1 {\sigma\sqr{2\pi}} e^{-\frac{t^2} {2\sigma^2} } \\

So lets integrate filtered fasor of frequency `w`, `D(w,t)` multiplied
by the probability that such delay exists:
Equation:
	H(w) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty N(t) D(w,t) dt = \\










