
=== HRTF field spherical harmonics in 2D layouts ===
\label{components2d}

Let us obtain the analytic expressions for the spherical components
of the HRTFs for 2D arrays located at the listener's horizontal plane.
Setting the elevation angle to zero $e=0$, 
the angle $\phi$ between the the left ear and a given loudspeaker can be
simply related to the azimuth as follows:
\be
\label{eq:delay_2d}
\phi(a, e=0) = -a + \pi / 2 \,.
\ee
The 2D version of \bref{eq:amplitudeDelayTimeIntegral} involves only one angular integral
and two labels $(l,\s)$ for the spherical components: 
\bea
\label{eq:amplitudeDelayTimeIntegral2D}
H_{l,\sigma}(t)
&=& \frac 1 {2\pi r} \int_{-\pi}^{\pi} Y_{l,\sigma}(a) \delta(t-\tau_{arr}(a)) da  \,.
\eea
The following 2D spherical harmonics definitions will be used: 
\be
Y_{l,+} = \cos (l a) \sac Y_{l,-} = \sin (l a) \sac l \ge 0 \,.
\ee

Half of the integrals \bref{eq:amplitudeDelayTimeIntegral2D} are zero due to symmetry reasons.
Note that the delay \bref{eq:delay_2d} is symmetric with respect to the $y$-axis. Thus all integrals
involving harmonics that are antisymmetrical with respect to the $y$-axis will vanish. 
Therefore,
\bea
H_{{l_{even}},-}(t) = 0
\sac
H_{{l_{odd}},+}(t) = 0 \,.
\eea
The remaining components can be solved in terms of standard functions:

\bea
\, H_{l_{even},+}(t)
&=& 
{\cos ( { l \arcsin \frac t {t_0} } ) \over \pi r \sqrt{t_0^2-t^2}}
\, \, \u(t+t_0) \u(-t)  
+
{ \cos ( { l \frac t {t_0} } ) \over \pi r t_0 }\,\ 
\, \, \u(t) \u( \pi t_0/2 -t)  \,,
\nn
\,  \, H_{l_{odd},-}(t)
&=& 
-{\sin ( { l \arcsin \frac t {t_0} } ) \over \pi r \sqrt{t_0^2-t^2}}
\, \, \u(t+t_0) \u(-t)  
-
{ \sin ( { l \frac t {t_0} } ) \over \pi r t_0 }\,\ 
\, \, \u(t) \u( \pi t_0/2 -t)  \,, \nn
\label{eq:spherical_2d}
\eea
where $u(t)$ is the unit step function.

The corresponding analysis in the frequency domain can also be
based on exact analytical expressions which follow from the
Fourier transforms of~\bref{eq:spherical_2d}, and which are included
in appendix~\ref{ap:Components2DFrequency}.

Figure \ref{fig:analyticalComponents} shows plots of the first five non-null components.
The following remarks can be derived both from the analytical expressions
and from the plots:
\begin{itemize}
\item Except for $l=0$, all components vanish at low frequencies and
attain their peak value at $\w t_0 = l + \undos$.
At higher frequencies, all components show resemblance with a comb-filter.
\item For a given $l$, peaks and notches are approximately separated by multiples
of the natural frequency of the problem $t_0^{-1} = R/c$.
\item After the first few peaks, the asymptotic expansions of the exact analytical
expressions lead to the following behaviour:
\be
\w t_0 \gg 1 \sac 
\tilde{H}_{l,\sigma}(\w) \rightarrow
{1 \over \sqrt{\w t_0} }  \times \sin(\w t_0 + \mbox{const.}) \,,
\ee
which implies an amplitude decay of 3~dB per octave at high frequencies, common to all orders.

\end{itemize}

Figure: fig:analyticalComponents figures/analyticalComponents fullWidth
Spherical harmonic components $\tilde{H}_{l,\sigma}$ of the HRTF field in 2D, for a spherical head of radius $8.8$~cm.





