== Conclusions ==
\label{sec:conclusions}

A formalism has been presented for dealing with existing algorithms to convert Ambisonics to binaural,
which introduces the concept of {\it HRTF field} and shows that its spherical harmonic components are the 
quantities that appear naturally in such conversion. 
This formalism has been exploited to obtain exact analytical expressions for these quantities, under a set idealized approximations.

The results have been applied to the study of a very relevant practical case: 
the excess filter perceived when listening to a plane wave sound field
which has first been captured or encoded into Ambisonics.

It has been shown and quantified that, although the excess filter does not necessarily destroy localization cues,
it exhibits significant high frequency damping which, unless very high Ambisonics order is used,
can ruin the quality of broad spectrum content, such as music.

The most important features derived from the analytic results persist
beyond the approximations used, as shown by comparison with results obtained from measured
HRTF databases.

An important question arises as to whether the excess filter studied here can be reduced or ameliorated.
At first sight, the problem looks hard, because the excess filter depends in an intrincated way on the particular sound field. 
In case of plane waves, it depends on the orientation of the incoming sound. A compensation strategy would
therefore have to be different for every possible sound field, rendering it impractical.

The formalism presented here could potentially be useful to tackle this issue, specially in the light
of the result \bref{eq:one_hrtf_to_rule_them_all}, which shows that all Ambisonics components in a given
order are affected by one single filter when converting to binaural. 
This application of the formalism will be addessed in future work.


== Acknowledgements ==

TODO: cal?
