== Effect of idealized assumptions ==
\label{sec:realistic_conditions}

This section analyzes the effect of the idealized assumptions that led to the analytical results. 
To this end, we shall focus on 2D layouts, as most of the existing measured 
HRTF databases lack a full 3D angle coverage, specially along the bottom part of the sphere.
When using real data, MIT Kemar HRTF database @cite:MitHrtf will be used,
which includes 72 loudspeakers at the listener's plane.


\begin{itemize}
\item {\bf Finite number of loudspeakers}.
To study the effect of the continuous loudspeaker array assumption,
excess filters, discussed in section~\ref{sec:lateral},
have been recomputed numerically using different numbers
of equi-distributed loudspeakers, and using the discretized 
version~\bref{discretization} of the formalism.

Figure \ref{fig:discreteArrayDivergence} shows a plot of the discrepancy between the discretized and continuous
results. As expected, the results hardly vary at low frequencies, and become more relevant at higher frequencies.
Below 5KHz, the discrepancy remains below 2-3 dB. 
As the number of loudspeakers $N_L$ is increased, the discrepancy remains bounded up to higher and
higher frequencies. For a 72 loudspeakers array, significant divergence occurs close to 22~KHz.

Figure: fig:discreteArrayDivergence figures/angularSamplingMaxReOrder1.pdf fullWidth
Excess filter divergence between continuous and discrete arrays of speakers, in the situation 
depicted in \ref{fig:ambisonicsVsDirectSound}, for 2D layouts, first Ambisonics order and max-$r_E$ criterion. 

\item {\bf Non-spherical head}. 
The effect of dropping the spherical head approximation in the computation of the delays for
every angle is rather small.
Figure \ref{fig:headDelayCompared} compares, along the horizontal plane, 
the delays obtained from the Woodworth/Schlosberg formula
against the delays extracted from the MIT Kemar HRTF database.
The error is less than 0.1ms at all angles 
and, for most of them, below 0.04ms.
Figure: fig:headDelayCompared figures/polarDelayCompared.pdf
Delay for an spherical head of radius 8.8cm and measured Kemar delays
measured at the left ear (aligned at 90 degrees, 0 degrees is front).


The impact on the main features of the filter is small,
as shown in figure \ref{fig:fullHrtfFilters}. 
Discrepancy with the continuous spherical head approximation
is below 2~dB at first and higher Ambisonics orders.

\item {\bf Realistic head diffraction}.
To finally drop all  idealized assumptions, the excess filters were recomputed using the full HRTF filters
of the MIR Kemar database. 
Figure \ref{fig:fullHrtfFilters} includes as well the excess filter in a 2D setup 
for an ipsilateral plane wave using the full measured HRTFs.
The newly computed curves preserve the main features of the idealized filters, like
prominent peaks and amplitude decay with frequency. 
The main differences are a general smoothing of the curves, including a
softening of the ripples, and the appearance of several narrow irregularities
at approximately 4KHz, 9KHz and 16KHz, precisely where the ipsilateral HRTF exhibits the deepest notches.

Figures: fig:fullHrtfFilters figures/fullHrtfFilters-maxrv.pdf figures/fullHrtfFilters-maxre.pdf figures/fullHrtfFilters-inphase.pdf
Excess filters for an ipsilateral plane wave in a 2D layout considering:
a) measured HRTF's (''measured''),
b) the delay deduced from such HRTF's (''delay''), and
c) analytical results as already shown in figure \ref{fig:sphereDelayFilters} (''analytical'').
Decodings: max-$r_V$ (top), max-$r_E$ (center) and in-phase (bottom).

 
\end{itemize}


