\section*{Scientific and technical report of activity carried out between June 2008 and September 2009}
David García Garzón


== Introduction ==

This document reports the work of the PhD candidate during the first year.
The work corresponds to the proposal titled ``Relating audio and 3D scenarios in audiovisual productions''
which was presented and approved in June 2008.
The focus of that research are technologies that automate
the production of audiovisual productions containing 3D audio,
including audio rendering, physical coding, 3D decoding and
environmental acoustic inference.

The work done during this year covers the areas of 
3D decoding and room inference.


== 3D decoding ==

=== Gathering, standardization and compensation of existing HRTF databases ===

Head Related Transfer Functions (HRTF)
capture the impulse response of a sound at the ear entrance
coming from a point at a given direction related to the head.
HRTF's are used for binaural and transaural
3D audio exhibition 
as well as for simulating actual hearing of other exhibition systems.
HRTF can be obtained by recording, by simulation or, 
in very simplified cases, by analytical formulas.

In any case, HRTF performance as to localization
heavily depends on how much the original head they were obtained from
matches the listener's one.
Many HRTF databases are available for research 
but they very heterogeneous regarding 
storage format, quality, postprocessing,
coordinate system conventions, angular sampling and others.

A first work of this research was to gather such databases and 
make them available under a common set of conventions and formats,
so that subsequent experiments can easily switch from one database
to another.

Several databases were collected including the ones from @cite:MitHrtf,
@cite:IrcamHrtf and @cite:KreuzerHrtf.
They were recoded in the same way regarding format (wav), sampling rate,
and indexes were generated so that the collect the mapping 
between each audio file to its orientation.

Also a procedure was defined so that given an HRTF database
its decomposition in spherical harmonics can be obtained provided
several strategies to compensates the irregularities that deviate them
from a continuous infinitesimal array of speakers.
The strategies included are:
* Vbap generation of missing hrtfs for the lower cap, which is often missing
* Ponderation by the solid angle which includes orientations which are nearer to each real speaker


=== Ambisonics decoding on regular 3D speaker arrays ===

Ambisonics is a technology based on the decomposition the acoustic field
in spherical harmonics.



=== Extension to Higher Order Ambisonics ===

=== Ambisonics decoding user tests ===


=== Ambisonics decoding qualitative analysis ===

The ambisonics decoding implemented and tested before,
showed a high loss of quality when reproducing 
sound with a rich high frequency content like music,
including, and specially, binaural reproduction which would be 
free of any speaker missplacing errors.

All the spherical harmonic components of all the databases
presented a strong decay with frequency.
An analytical model was developed in order to explain this.
The analytical model simplified the real case in many ways
it considered having an spherical head, that all the frequencies
where delayed the same way while difracting on the head and that
the arrays of speakers was infinitesimal.
Still, the model managed to explain the decay
for different decodings criteria, orders of ambisonics.

=== Hybridisation of VBAP and Ambisonics ===







* Implementation and test of binaural 

* Implementation and test of regular 3D speaker array decoding


* Ambisonics decoding
** Ambisonics regular speaker array decoding
** Ambisonics binaural decoding
** HOA decoding
** Quality reduction due to the head presence
* VBAP
** Alternatives to Pulkki triangulation
* User test design


== Room acoustic inference ==

The room acoustic inference problem consists on obtaining a set of room 
parameters regarding its geometry and materials so that its acoustics
properties are undistinguishable from the ones captured in a 
room impulse response or in a echoic recording.

=== Onset detection in room IR's ===



=== Characterization of the specular rebounds in a square cuboid ===


=== Backtracking algorithm square cuboid ===


* Onsets detection in room IR's
* Analysis of the square cuboid case
** Specular rebounds caracterization
** Backtracking algorithm






